Thirty one pages. 2004. Authors: G. Belov; G. Scheithauer
Pdf of good quality.

The paper presents a column generation method for the CSP that don't generate UKP as a pricing problem (it generates a much more complicated problem as the pricing problem). It's also the same method that had the best results at the comparison between CSP/BPP solvers in: "Bin Packing and Cutting Stock Problems: Mathematical Models and Exact Algorithms" (Maxence Delorme, Manuel Iori, Silvano Martello).

"For 1D-CSP, the first model with column generation was proposed by Gilmore and Gomory [6]." (p. 2)

"Note that many branch-and-price implementations employ simple cuts which do not provide finite description of the convex hull of integer solutions as is the case for Chvátal-Gomory cuts. For example, a special case of Gomory mixed-integer cuts, where only a single previous constraint is used for cut generation, are applied in [14]. This corresponds to widely-used practices and general beliefs expressed in the literature. Usually, in the context of an LP- based branch-and-bound algorithm, where the LP relaxation is solved using column generation, cutting planes are carefully selected in order to avoid the destruction of the structure of the pricing problem. This viewpoint is shared by numerous authors. Barnhart, Hane, and Vance [15], for example, mention as one of the main contributions of their branch-and-price-and-cut algorithm “a pricing problem that does not change even as cuts are added, and similarly, a separation algorithm that does not change even as columns are added.” Vanderbeck [8] writes in the introduction of his computational study of a column generation algorithm for 1D-BPP and 1D-CSP: “Adding cutting planes can be viewed in the same way [as branching]. However, the scheme efficiency depends on how easily one can recognize the prescribed column property that defines the auxiliary variable when solving the column generation subproblem, i.e., on the complexity of the resulting subproblem modifications.”" (p. 3)

"Our algorithm can be seen as an investigation ‘against the mainstream’. The LP relaxation in the nodes is strengthened by Chvátal-Gomory and Gomory mixed-integer cuts. A standalone cutting plane algorithm for 1D-CSP was investigated in [16,17]. When such cutting planes are added to the LP relaxation, the pricing problem becomes very complex and often cannot be solved optimally in an acceptable time. Moreover, the modeling and implementation of its solution method as well as of the cutting plane apparatus for the chosen kind of cuts require much effort. Here we develop a new upper bound for this pricing problem. We develop local cuts (valid only in a subproblem of the solution tree)." (p. 3)

"In the standard column generation process, the dual multipliers are used to assess the cutting pattern. In practice, when implementing a column generation approach on the basis of a commercial IP Solver such as ILOG CPLEX[4], we may employ their standard procedures to solve (12), which was done in [27] for 2D-2CP. An advantage of this design is the low implementation effort. Traditionally there were two methods to solve (12): dynamic programming, applied already in [6], and branch-and-bound, cf. [35,36]. With cutting planes added, it is necessary to anticipate the values of the coefficients the column will have in the cuts during this process. These coefficients are non-linear and non-separable functions (15) of the elements of the cutting pattern vector. Finally, the dual information from the cut rows helps to evaluate the attractiveness of the column. Thus, selecting the most attractive column involves the solution of an integer programming problem with a non-separable objective function, which does not seem to have any usable structure, and has to be solved with branch-and-bound. It is much more difficult than the linear knapsack problem for column generation arising when no cuts are added in the LP." (p. 13)

"5.1 Column Generation for 1D-CSP" (p. 14) (Section where s/he reiterates the impossibility of solving the pricing problem with an algorithm for the UKP, as the pricing problem isn't and instance of the UKP.)

"The general-purpose cuts considered in this work make the pricing problem extremely complicated and much implementation effort is required. The question arises, whether any other classes of cuts, especially such that do not complicate the pricing problem, can provide a comparable contribution." (p. 29)

