Front Slide
	Name
	University
	Event name
	Date

What is UKP?
	UKP is an acronym for Unbounded Knapsack Problem
	#It's a variant of the classic 0-1/bounded knapsack problem, where there's no restriction on the quantity of each item present on the solution.
	Very similar to BKP or 0-1 KP, the only difference: no item quantity restriction

UKP Model
	Copy latex equations

(U)KP Jargon
	The efficiency of an item j is pj/wj
	The smallest items are the ones tied with the lowest weight (this is because in real world problems this is a "size", and the solution is constrained in 1/2/3 dimensions, and not a "weight")
	The best item is the smallest between the most efficient ones
	Two item with the same profit and weight are the same


UKP Basic Knowledge (or Well-Know UKP aspects)
	UKP is faster to solve than BKP and 0-1 KP (one less restriction to control, faster to solve)
	UKP is yet NP-complete (CHECK IF NP-Hard IS MORE ADEQUATE)
	UKP instances can be converted to BKP/0-1KP instances (but this is inefficient).

UKP Basic Knowledge (or Well-Know UKP aspects)
	UKP can be solved on pseudo-polynomial time O(nc) by Dynamic Programming (DP)
	For instances with a great number of items, often the solution is mainly comprised by efficient items
	The heuristics and approximative algorithms give results very close to the optimal.

MOTIVATION:

History Highlights
	The UKP was referenced simply as "the knapsack problem" on many old papers[REFERÊNCIAS] (what can make bibliographic revision a little more complex)
	1966-19XX: Many DP algorithms are proposed. The majority of those papers reference UKP as "a/the knapsack problem".
	19XX-
	AAAA: The concept of a functional DP algorithm for UKP is presented.
	BBBB: An implementation of this concept is presented.
	CCCC: An hybrid algorithm combining B&B with the functional DP is presented.

History
	DP era
		Many exact DP solutions are presented on pseudo-code form.
		Example: Show many works (one topic)
		No instances suggested, No comparisons made.
	B&B era
		Solving very large "easy instances" the fastest way (B&B).
		Example: 
		Random/"Weak/Strong correlated" instances. Comparison only between B&B methods.


	
	



